choosing a CMS (#29198)
gatsbyjs/gatsby: docs/docs/conceptual/choosing-a-cms.md

---

> title: Choosing Your CMS(s)

Reviewer: Should this have an 'e'...? CMSes does 🤷‍♀️

```suggestion
title: Choosing Your CMS(es)
```

Author: Ha! I actually wasn't sure, but looking at it now I'm seeing a discussion in Slack in June 2019 where we agreed on `CMSs` so will keep this way.

---

> At their core, most medium-sized and large Gatsby websites are backed by a so-called "headless CMS". Headless CMSes excel at allowing content editors to flexibly create a content schema of inter-related content models.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
At their core, most medium-sized and large Gatsby websites are backed by a so-called "headless CMS". Headless CMSes excel at allowing content editors to flexibly create a content schema of interrelated content models.
```

One of the key questions people ask when building a Gatsby site is "which CMS should I use?"

## Choosing a Headless CMS

If you're looking for a primary CMS (general-purpose, flexible content modelling) to power your website, there are several ways you could make your decision:

> **First**, focus on **top-flight general-purpose CMSs** with **first-class Gatsby integrations** and **high popularity** among Gatsby users. A ["first-class integration"](https://support.gatsbyjs.com/hc/en-us/articles/360052503494-Developing-a-first-class-CMS-integration-for-Gatsby-Cloud) means it supports the main Cloud functionality of Gatsby -- previews and incremental builds.

Reviewer: For scan-ability, I'd add in h3s for the three major points in this section (popular integrations, price, and project requirements).

So like this one could be:

```
### 1) Popular, first-class Gatsby integrations

**First**, focus on...
```

Author: Ah, that's a great point. I've done this!

In terms of popularity, you can see [top integrations listed by monthly downloads here](https://www.gatsbyjs.com/plugins?=gatsby-source). There are currently (January 2021) eight CMSs used by over 1% of Gatsby users. These are:

- **five general-purpose headless CMSs:** Contentful, Sanity, DatoCMS, Strapi, and Prismic

- **two general-purpose full-stack CMSs** running in "headless" mode: Wordpress and Drupal

> - **one specialized CMS** (Shopify).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **one specialized CMS**: Shopify
```

**Second**, consider the price point:

- If you're working on a personal project or prototype, a few of these have a generous free tier (Contentful, Sanity, DatoCMS, Strapi, Prismic).

- If you're looking more at "Team", "Pro", or "Business" price points (eg $29, $99, or \$299 per month), the above CMSs are all good options, plus Wordpress and Drupal .

- If you're looking more at an "enterprise" project in the four digits per month and up, Contentful is the leader, with others using Contentstack, Sanity, and Strapi.

**Third,** consider project requirements.

**Contentful** is the most common CMS used with Gatsby, accounting for roughly half of all CMS usage with Gatsby. It's the most mature headless CMS as measured by revenue, number of customers, and venture funding. In some ways, it's become the "default" to use with Gatsby.

> Users choosing other CMSs typically have a specific reason for their choice. While every user has different reasons for their choice, some trends we see users choosing **Sanity** or **Strapi** for the developer-friendliness or if they need something on-premise; **DatoCMS** if they will run into Contentful's model limits and want a lower-priced alternative, **Prismic** if they like the content editing UI; **Contentstack** if they like the editing UI and have an enterprise budget; **Wordpress** when the client or content team is already familiar with the Wordpress UI. **Drupal** if open-source, configurability / custom code are important.

Reviewer: I'd split this into a list, to make it easier to scan

```suggestion
Users choosing other CMSs typically have a specific reason for their choice. While every user has different reasons for their choice, we have noticed some trends for how users decide:

- **Sanity** or **Strapi** for the developer-friendliness or if they need something on-premise
- **DatoCMS** if they will run into Contentful's model limits and want a lower-priced alternative
- **Prismic** if they like the content editing UI
- **Contentstack** if they like the editing UI and have an enterprise budget
- **Wordpress** when the client or content team is already familiar with the Wordpress UI
- **Drupal** if open-source, configurability, or custom code are important.
```

## Using multiple CMS systems together

> Another approach is, rather than using one CMS, use different CMSs for different parts of the website. Known as a ["content mesh" approach](https://www.gatsbyjs.com/blog/2018-10-04-journey-to-the-content-mesh/), the typical rationale here is that one CMS provides must-have specialized functionality but is less good for the rest of the site. Typically the decision is to use a specialized CMS for part of the website, and a general-purpose CMS for most of the website.
> 
> Typically there are two reasons to intentionally take this approach:
> 
> ### Using Shopify as an e-commerce system
> 
> Shopify has best-in-class e-commerce functionality, but the rest of their interface (for example, their blogs feature) is often seen as subpar compared to other systems. As a result, it's very standard to use Shopify as the backend for the store, but a general purpose CMS like Contentful as the backend for the rest of the site.
> 
> ### Using Wordpress as a blogging tool
> 
> Because Wordpress is so familiar to content authors, and has a best-in-class content composition experience, it's quite common to move the blog portion of the website with Gatsby, and use a flexible content modelling CMS for the rest of the website.
> 
> Apollo does this [for their blog](https://twitter.com/apollographql/status/1250479066605662210), as we do for the blog at [gatsbyjs.com/blog](gatsbyjs.com/blog).
> 

Reviewer: Restructuring this to try and make it easier to scan. Lmk what you think.

```suggestion
Can't choose just one CMS? You can use different CMSs for different parts of the website. Known as a ["content mesh" approach](https://www.gatsbyjs.com/blog/2018-10-04-journey-to-the-content-mesh/), the typical rationale here is that one CMS provides must-have specialized functionality but is less good for the rest of the site.

Typically, teams that use multiple CMSs use a specialized CMS for part of the website and a general-purpose CMS for the rest of the website. There are two common reasons teams choose this approach:

- **Using Shopify as an e-commerce system.**
    - Shopify has best-in-class e-commerce functionality, but the rest of their interface (for example, their blogs feature) is often seen as subpar compared to other systems. As a result, it's very standard to use Shopify as the backend for the store, with a general-purpose CMS like Contentful as the backend for the rest of the site.
- **Using WordPress as a blogging tool.**
    - Because WordPress is so familiar to content authors and has a best-in-class content composition experience, it's quite common to move the blog portion of the website with Gatsby, and use a flexible content modelling CMS for the rest of the website. (Apollo does this (source: [tweet from Apollo](https://twitter.com/apollographql/status/1250479066605662210)), as does the [Gatsby blog](gatsbyjs.com/blog).)

```

### Considerations when using multiple CMSs

> One of the key considerations when using content in multiple systems is that at some point one  content often needs to "know about" another system. For example, a landing page with content in Contentful may need to embed information about a specific product SKU (which lives in Shopify).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
One of the key considerations when using content in multiple systems is that - at some point - one content system often needs to "know about" another system. For example, a landing page with content in Contentful may need to embed information about a specific product SKU from Shopify.
```

> The easiest way to create relationship references across CMSs is through one CMS storing unique IDs of content living in another CMS. In this case, you'd store an array of Shopify product IDs as a field of the relevant model in Contentful, then pull in the correct data via the appropriate queries in gatsby-node.js.

Reviewer: It would be great if we could find or build an example of a site that does this, so that if folks don't understand this explanation they could look through the code themselves.

Reviewer: Or even just attach a screenshot of what that would look like in Contentful/Shopify

Author: That's a really good idea. I'll do this for our Use Cases pages.

## Other non-CMS options

Finally, there are several options for content composition and management that work well as non-CMS choices.

> - **Markdown** and **MDX** are common choices for documentation and small developer sites, since they are natural composition formats for developers and allow embedding components within your content. There are several guides in our [Routing and Pages section](https://www.gatsbyjs.com/docs/how-to/routing/) on using Markdown and MDX. You may also want to consider a git-based CMS like NetlifyCMS or Foresty.io to provide a UI for this workflow.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Markdown** and **MDX** are common choices for documentation and small developer sites, since they are natural composition formats for developers and allow embedding components within your content. There are several guides in our [Routing and Pages documentation](https://www.gatsbyjs.com/docs/how-to/routing/) on using Markdown and MDX. You may also want to consider a git-based CMS like NetlifyCMS or Foresty.io to provide a UI for this workflow.
```

> - **JSON** or **YAML** is a common choice for hierarchical data, for example, a site navigation tree, especially when the underlying content is stored in markdown.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **JSON** or **YAML** is a common choice for hierarchical data (for example, a site navigation tree), especially when the underlying content is stored in Markdown.
```

> - **Web-based spreadsheets**, like **Airtable** or **Google Sheets**, are common use cases for tabular data. Airtable used this to [power their store locator](https://www.gatsbyjs.com/blog/2020-05-07-gatsby-delivers-impossible-burgers-map/), and [ProPublica used this as a database](https://www.gatsbyjs.com/blog/2019-03-29-interview-with-david-eads/) for interactive data journalism graphics.

Reviewer: Can you update the link text to be more descriptive? So that if a screen reader users ended up on a link without the context of the rest of the sentence, they'd have an idea of where the link would take them.

Additional context: https://www.washington.edu/accessibility/links/

Author: Ah, thanks. Updated link text!

> - Other vertical-specific solutions for specific parts of the website, eg having a Careers page pull data from Greenhouse or Lever.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Other domain-specific solutions for specific parts of the website (e.g., having a Careers page pull data from Greenhouse or Lever).
```

One of the key questions people ask when building a Gatsby site is "which CMS should I use?"

## Choosing a Headless CMS

If you're looking for a primary CMS (general-purpose, flexible content modelling) to power your website, there are three main factors you can use to narrow your search:

### 1) Popular, first-class Gatsby integrations

**First**, when possible, we recommend you focus on **top-flight general-purpose CMSs** with **first-class Gatsby integrations** and **high popularity** among Gatsby users. A ["first-class integration"](https://support.gatsbyjs.com/hc/en-us/articles/360052503494-Developing-a-first-class-CMS-integration-for-Gatsby-Cloud) means it supports the main Cloud functionality of Gatsby -- previews and incremental builds.

In terms of popularity, you can see [top integrations listed by monthly downloads here](https://www.gatsbyjs.com/plugins?=gatsby-source). There are currently (January 2021) eight CMSs used by over 1% of Gatsby users. These are:

> - **five general-purpose headless CMSs:** Contentful, Sanity, DatoCMS, Strapi, and Prismic

Reviewer 2: Let's do alphabetic order so we can tell people they are not ranked by top -> bottom

```suggestion
- **five general-purpose headless CMSs:** Contentful, DatoCMS, Prismic, Sanity and Strapi
```

> - **two general-purpose full-stack CMSs** running in "headless" mode: Wordpress and Drupal

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- **two general-purpose full-stack CMSs** running in "headless" mode: Drupal and Wordpress
```

- **one specialized CMS**: Shopify

### 2) The right price point

**Second**, it's important to consider the price point given your budget:

> - If you're working on a personal project or prototype, a few of these have a generous free tier (Contentful, Sanity, DatoCMS, Strapi, Prismic).

Reviewer 2: Try to keep alphabetic order

Author: 👍

- If you're looking more at "Team", "Pro", or "Business" price points (eg $29, $99, or \$299 per month), the above CMSs are all good options, plus Wordpress and Drupal .

> - If you're looking more at an "enterprise" project in the four digits per month and up, Contentful is the leader, with others using Contentstack, Sanity, and Strapi.

Reviewer 2: I don't like the leader part. What are they leader of? Integration? UI on the dashboard?

Author: Good call -- lazy wording. Removed.

### 3) Meeting specialized requirements

**Third,** other project requirements and team preferences will play a role.

> **Contentful** is the most common CMS used with Gatsby, accounting for roughly half of all CMS usage with Gatsby. It's the most mature headless CMS as measured by revenue, number of customers, and venture funding. In some ways, it's become the "default" to use with Gatsby.

Reviewer 2: Can we not praise Contentful to much in this guide? Sadly, it's one of our worst source plugins. We should praise Sanity & Wordpress

Author: Curious for specifics on the Contentful issues -- around build times here? Support for other features? Quality as measured by bugs? Can include that information.

I can also pull Wordpress a bit farther up in the list (which makes sense given level of usage)

Author: Also what the great parts of Wordpress / Strapi integrations!

Author: Okay, DM-ed a bit, cleaned up Contentful copy, added Strapi copy. Moved Wordpress up a bit, but let's wait on updates to copy there until upcoming WP launches.
